so i suspect that a lot of this person's
problems are not due to
the low iq this is not what's dooming
them
they are doomed but
what
what they're doomed by is their belief
of their own success or their inability
to become successful
my iq is below average
what are some of the ways i can live a
successful and meaningful life
hello dr k i'm a young adult male and
i'm currently going through an
existential crisis where i believe that
i am not going to make it in life
i don't have any skills or talents that
makes me unique in
in the direction of my life is going to
a complete disaster the direction of my
life is going to a complete disaster and
nothing can be done
i'm in college studying business that
can't get me anywhere
uh i'm still living with my parents
because i don't have stable income to
survive on i can't do basic tasks
such as using the cash register at work
folding clothes sweeping and cleaning my
house
there's so many tasks that i can't do
right
i can't pay attention in my college
classes i take longer to understand
things more than others and i struggle
to think fast
it's horrible because my parents
constantly put me down and compare me to
my peers who are doctors lawyers and
software engineers making far more than
i do
the huge issue that's affecting me is my
low iq i took an iq test when i was in
school by the psychologist and i scored
around 80 which is exactly below average
after this the psychologist even felt
pity for me and told me to my face that
i won't amount to anything in life
i swear to god that i am probably the
dumbest to walk this earth
i am extremely unsure of how i will
survive in this world
as
that if your iq is below 87 you can't
work any type of job to survive
this seems embarrassing because it's
difficult when i want to move out
when i want to move out my parents house
i'm not financially stable to do it i
get depressed every day knowing that i
can't prove myself to others my dreams
of being a physicist or an investment
banker please don't laugh are not going
to happen because because of this curse
i was thinking about jumping off a
building one day because i can't take
this anymore
so
the first point
right is if you're really considering if
you're having thoughts of hurting
yourself or jumping off of a building
you may want to actually seek
professional help right so like this is
something and we'll talk about why that
may be particularly important for this
person
um so what we're gonna actually do is
take a step back and and look at
let's talk about a couple things okay so
we're gonna talk about iq we're going to
talk about this person's situation and
we're going to talk a little bit about
if your iq is below average can you have
a successful and meaningful life
spoiler alert my answer is going to be
yes
but it is my job to convince you of that
right i'm not necessarily correct
it may not be possible so let's just try
to be
as objective as we can and kind of think
through it
okay
so let's start with this
what is a successful and meaningful life
how do we define that
right so
that's the first question is like what
is a successful and meaningful life
can anyone give me an answer
what do you all think
how do you determine what a success
i i don't know
right so okay so like people are sort of
saying like let's just think through
this right
so
if your goal is to have a successful and
meaningful life which i have i have no
you know i think that's wonderful that
you want that
let's first start by like understanding
what it is that you're shooting towards
okay so
let's think about it okay what
is right so like i don't know so people
are saying income
okay being productive
being happy
and so this is kind of interesting but
like having your needs met
excellent
right so this all like is good
fulfillment
but what i'm gonna do is i'm gonna say
i'm gonna go ahead and
call an audible here and i'm going to
move this one up here because then like
the next question is like what is
fulfillment right
chat it's like what does that even mean
so now the next question is so if if you
want to determine whether you can have a
successful or meaningful life the next
thing that we need to do is sort of try
to figure out
what are the things that correlate with
uh
with this right so then the next
question is does iq
somehow correlate with these things
okay
so like i i think we can clearly say
that probably like iq and income is
going to be like correlated
but i don't know that iq and
productivity happy or getting your needs
met is necessarily correlated maybe
because of this we can also say that
needs met in terms of financial
so maybe your financial needs can be met
this way
but once again i say this as a
psychiatrist who's worked with many many
people who are like very narcissistic
and very successful ie investment
bankers
i can pretty much tell you that like you
know
sure they have the income and they may
be sort of productive but they certainly
don't feel that way oftentimes they work
a lot but they don't really feel
productive because all they're doing is
editing powerpoints i kid you not like
their job is like okay they get a
powerpoint at midnight and their you
know their
partner says hey i need this by 6 a.m
make these changes
so they spend 6 hours running models
making these changes to a 35
slide deck
and they make the changes and they send
it out to the whole team the other
partner on the team is says hey
these changes are bad i need you to make
these changes i needed you to revert
back to what we had before
and so like it's just like constantly
adding editing slide decks to meet the
preferences and whims of a particular
person
so i i certainly will attest to the fact
that many of them are not happy they
don't feel fulfilled they don't have
meaning they certainly have income
but they they pay the price of
fulfillment success meaning and
happiness
that's what they pay for money right so
that's what they like they get money and
then they have
they don't have those other things so
i'm not really sure that you know aside
from income
iq is necessarily correlated with like
other things
so that's the first thing so you may not
be screwed in life just because you have
a low iq now let's let's kind of also
kind of look at things a little bit more
objectively and sort of try to
understand okay like what's up with iq
so here's what what we need to
understand about iq
so the the mean no sorry
mean median iq is about a hundred and
one standard deviation which is about 70
of people
are between 85 and 115 so one standard
deviation is about 15. so this is where
most people live below 85 we start to
get to you know there's about 15 percent
that are less than this
and 15 over here
that are greater than this right
and so 80 is like
right over here and so even if you're
below average on iq
it doesn't mean that you're like
devastatingly screwed
so that you know the number at which we
really kind of think about intellectual
disability is actually like below 70. so
once you cross 70 because remember one
standard deviation is 15
right so a second standard deviation is
70. so this is where you start to get it
into the mild intellectual disability
range
and this is where you may not really be
able to
uh
for example be a physicist i don't know
if someone with a iq of less than 70 can
be a physicist i just don't know i'm not
saying that they can't
but in this 70 to 85 range i personally
don't think that this person is quite as
screwed as they think they are
um so you can still like hold a normal
job it may take you longer to learn
particular things there are lots of
different jobs where you don't
necessarily need to have a high iq to be
successful
and so let's kind of flip back to the
post for a second and take a look at
you know what's going on here so i
suspect that a lot of this person's
problems are not due to
the low iq this is not what's dooming
them
they are doomed but
what what they're doomed by is their
belief of their own success or their
inability to become successful
okay so now we're going to talk a little
bit about this so like this person has a
problem of
if you read this post
it can be summarized with this statement
i will fail
okay so let's just kind of look through
this for a second
um
so i'm currently going through an
existential crisis where i believe i am
not going to make it in life
okay
that's the first thing they say not
gonna make it
okay and then
um
uh
i don't have any skills
or talents no skills or talents
so they believe this right the direction
of my life is complete disaster
and um
i'm in college studying business that
can't get me anywhere not going anywhere
right and then i want to fast forward so
they're you know they talk about all the
things that they have difficulty doing
okay so can't perform basic tasks can't
do basics
um
parents constantly put me down
okay
and then uh
can't prove myself so we're gonna jump
there's the iq paragraph and then can't
prove myself
so we're gonna analyze
what this person is saying okay and then
we're gonna talk about dreams so these
are the things that i want you all to
take away okay so they're not gonna make
it they have no skills or talents their
life is a complete disaster they're not
going anywhere they can't do basic tasks
their parents constantly put them down
they can't you can't prove yourself and
you have particular dreams
so you may say like wow that sounds kind
of rough
so here here are the points right so
this is what is in the post
and now we're going to kind of examine
it so our examination is going to be
here
so it starts with this idea that i will
fail
okay now this is really important
because the i will fail idea affects us
in two ways
so one is it creates something called a
nocebo effect so we're going to talk a
little bit about psychology and
so science
is something called the placebo effect
which is that if someone believes that a
medication will work it is more likely
to work so you can even give someone
who's got like diabetes let's say a
sugar pill the irony and the irony is
that if they believe that the medication
will lower their blood sugar even though
it's a sugar pill if they believe it'll
lower their blood sugar it actually
lowers their blood sugar some that's
called the placebo effect now the
opposite end of the placebo effect is
called the nocebo effect and i see this
a lot in psychiatry
so sometimes i'll get people who come
into my office and they'll say
medication has never worked for me
medication does not work
so they they're coming into my office
with a nocebo effect and even the
thought that medication never works for
me is going to actually affect
the efficacy of medication
so if you go through your life thinking
you will fail there's actually
scientific data to back this up
it's not just like a psychological thing
it's like it's even like a
neuroscientific thing right so this is
important to understand that this works
for physical medicines so forget about
psychology for a second we're talking
about diabetes levels cholesterol levels
response to chemotherapy and cancer
treatment that the nocebo effect is
actually active in all divisions of
medicine so it's not just psychological
it's physiological
so what this sort of means is that you
actually if you believe you're going to
fail you are actually more likely to
fail and i don't just mean
psychologically it's not like oh i
believe i'm going to fail therefore i'm
not going to try as hard etc etc i'm not
talking about psychological stuff i mean
like physiologically your body is
prepped to try to create failure
so second thing this is going to be a
little bit more psychological or
neuroscientific has to do with our
success calculation
so
our brain
has this circuit that that performs
success calculations so it basically
performs this calculation that sort of
determines motivation and behavior
okay so let me give you guys an example
so this morning i did not wake up go out
to my garage grab a shovel and start
digging for buried treasure
why did i not do that because my brain
performed a calculation that was like
hey by the way if you dig for buried
treasure you're probably not going to
find it so there's no point in trying
okay now we also see this kind of
motivational stuff happen with people
who have difficulty with dating
so people who believe that they're going
to be alone forever will be not
motivated to date or it'll be very
difficult for them to date because their
brain is literally making a calculation
that is like likelihood of success is
like a big part of the calculation
and so if your likelihood of success is
very very low because you you believe
you will fail then your motivation is
going to like be very very low okay
so now
what we sort of get is is like
a sort of a vicious cycle okay where i
will fail we've got the nocibo effect
success calculation is low decreased
motivation therefore
these two things are going to kind of
combine
and result in a higher percent
it's a
it's a percent sign just poorly drawn
let me try to draw it again
an increased percentage of failure
right
and so the more the more we fail the
more we get
evidence
that
i will
fail
and the stronger this gets this forms a
feedback loop
goes over here
this becomes stronger this becomes
stronger this becomes stronger
motivation
motivation actually goes down so let's
actually
do this
right motivation decreases and then
these things in turn are going to
increase our chance of failure which
will in turn increase the evidence that
i will fail which will then go back
around and feed into this
okay and this is how we see now i want
you guys to look at all these statements
how do where do you think these
statements came from
well actually let's stop here for a
second
okay
where did these statements come from
these statements come from going through
the cycle over and over and over again
has nothing to do with iq
so like iq may actually result in a
greater chance a lot having lower iq may
have something to do with a greater
chance of failure but this degree of
certainty about failure right so if you
had a confident person with loc iq and
i've met with those people i i mean i i
know people like that like i have
friends like that
you know they just sort of like
understand the limits of their ability
but they are actually like sort of
chilling in life right they're kind of
chilling they're like they have their
job they're not going to be
they're not actually super ambitious or
sometimes they actually are super
ambitious and can be very very good at
stuff
um so for example i have a friend who's
a chef who probably has like a below
average iq they've been tested as well
we're going to talk about testing in a
second
um but
you know so they they're they tested
below average and they just went to
culinary school and they're like they're
doing fine in life they're actually like
pretty ambitious they're pretty
productive they're
not happy but for reasons that i think
are unrelated to their iq or their
professional success so a lot of
professions out there that don't require
a high iq that you can also still be
like very reliable very successful um i
think that there are a lot of positions
that people with higher iq may find
boring
that people with lower iq may be better
suited for so there may be a certain
amount of like you know day in and day
out kind of stuff that like organizing
stuff like those kinds of things jobs
like being a personal assistant there's
a lot of stuff out there where people
with low iq may be better suited towards
now let's remember that this person
wants to be a physicist or an investment
banker so we don't want to alter their
dreams based on hey you can't be a
physicist or an investment banker
you need to be a personal assistant or a
chef like we don't want to say that to
this person that's not what i'm saying
although i suspect that based on their
attitude
they are interpreting things that way so
like let's look at this
after this the psychologist even felt
pity for me and told me to my face that
i won't amount to anything in life
i highly highly highly doubt this
statement
the psychologist would have to be the
worst psychologist on the planet to tell
you to your face that i won't amount to
anything hey you're not going to amount
to anything in life
they may have said hey it may be hard
for you to become an investment banker
or physicist
they may have said something like that
but
given this
what the psychologist said may be
interpreted in this way
given your attitude you may be even
interpreted what i said as hey you can
never become a physicist or an
investment banker which i didn't say
that
right we may be a great physicist or
investment picker i don't know
let's finish kind of analyzing this okay
so that's where all so these statements
come from this cycle
and the question is okay so like if this
is a cycle where does it
start here's where it starts
right so if your parents because this is
the thing i don't think they just
started comparing you to people who are
doctors and lawyers like just over the
last year
chances are as you were growing up your
parents started by putting you down a
lot they made lots of comparisons they
sort of didn't accept you for who you
are and wanted you to be something else
so as parents
parental comparison
is where the cycle starts
hate to blame the parents so this is
just a hypothesis maybe maybe your
parents were wonderful who knows i'm not
saying they aren't wonderful but if they
compare you a lot this is where the kind
of cycle starts right because what
they're always doing no matter how hard
you succeed with parental comparison
let's look at it this way okay
so they say
why can't you okay so they'll say
here's you
here's someone else
so
why did you get a c
someone else got a b
right
why can't you be like this person this
person gets b's
if you get a b
what
why don't you get an a
right
why are you studying business
this person is pretty med
you're a doctor
why don't you go to harvard
right
if you go to harvard
why the are you becoming a
psychiatrist
right it's such a waste of your talents
you're too smart to be a psychiatrist
you should do something that's more
competitive like cardiology
my point is that iq
doesn't really determine this
it's the parental comparison
right so the parental comparison is
where this starts and no matter
what you accomplish
they're always comparing you to someone
better
it doesn't really matter
how good you are
right
like it doesn't matter if parents are
going to compare if they're not going to
accept you for who you are like they're
going to compare you and then the the
conclusion from all of this
is you're
not
good enough
and then it's a it's a very short hop
skip and a jump
to
you
will
fail
and thus the cycle begins
okay
so this is the kind of thing where i
think that what's holding this person
back is not actually their iq although
i'm not disputing that you know i don't
know that like
someone within 80 iq i don't know
their ability to become a physicist i i
just don't know
but what i do think may be very very
possible is for example if you love
physics and like you understand physics
like let's say that
how can i say this
sometimes the worst students make the
best teachers
so like i
if it's hard for you to understand
things and you can get to that place of
understanding
you may actually be a far better teacher
than someone with a very high iq and the
reason for that is because people with
the high iq can just they can skip all
the middle steps but if you've got a low
iq you may learn things slower but you
learn things you learn all the middle
steps and you may actually be a better
teacher
so i know it sounds kind of weird but
like the reason that i'm really good at
teaching motivation
and understanding motivation is because
i suck at it
like my internal motivational drive is
very very low and oddly enough that's
actually like an advantage in a bizarre
situation
right because like now i understand like
i couldn't take motivation for granted
it wasn't easy for me it was so hard all
the time
and so that's what actually makes me
like an effective teacher on motivation
because i can't take any of it for
granted i'm just assuming for a moment
that i'm an effective teacher on
meditation motivation which i may not be
so the last thing that i want to point
out is the statement of can't prove
myself so if you want to understand
what leads you to being fulfilled
and meaning
if you're trying to prove yourself
to other people
this is never going to happen
so if you want to understand like okay
how do you become successful
here's what it is you start by
understanding okay like here's my iq
totally fine
you understand what are the things
outside of my iq that are holding me
back because it's not just iq right it's
this belief that you're going to fail to
understand okay this belief came from
somewhere so this is something that you
may want to work with a therapist right
not only for the suicidality but also
like for this kind of stuff like i'm not
saying go to a therapist just so you
don't kill yourself i'm saying go to a
therapist because first of all suicide
is scary and you shouldn't kill yourself
and the reason you shouldn't kill
yourself is because i don't agree with
this premise and a therapist can help
you
change this
they can help you
do this
and then suddenly all of this changes
right then you're
harnessing
placebo
instead of nocebo
and then suddenly like things that even
have no biological effect
are starting to work for you
so you can absolutely do that
the other thing that i just want to
point out is iq tests i don't know
exactly what the reliability of the iq
test is but if you're at 80 and you got
tested once you know you need to be a
little bit careful because i do believe
that iq tests are affected or confounded
by different things like mood
or you know stuff like depression
so depending on when you took it there
may be like things that negatively
impact the reliability of the iq test
so i also don't know like what the
reliability between two tests is
so for example like you know tests just
have different light reliability so if i
if you get tested twice
you may
discover that you're actually like
90 the second time right there's
probably some amount of like
movement in terms of reliability now
generally speaking iq tests should
control for things like age
or um
or like
level of education i think they try to
control for those things but there may
be confounding variables so i don't you
know i don't know how to say this but
like an iq test is not like a biopsy
right it's a test that tries to
approximate your intelligence
the last thing is that iq tests don't
really look at eq
so there are some people that i know for
example that are like average or even
below average iq but are actually super
high in the eq
domain and this could be you you never
know and if you're high in the eq domain
you can actually be very very successful
and offer a lot of value to
places so a good example of this is kind
of interesting but if you look at
investment banking
the people who are actually at the top i
think have an eq greater than iq
situation so the people who are have the
highest iq or the ones that are best
at running models creating models doing
a lot of like the technical work
but actually if you want to really
succeed at the highest levels of
investment banking it's about
relationships and relationship building
it's about bringing the business in the
door so iq is necessary for executing
the business eq is necessary for
bringing the business in the door
okay so you may not be screwed
last thing is that you know i'd say that
if you're thinking about
the dreams right so this person dreams
of being a physicist or an investment
banker which is totally fine you're
allowed to have your dreams but i would
be really
curious
like i'm asking i'm telling you to be
about where that dream comes from what
is it like because like what do you know
about investment banking or being a
physicist why does that appeal to you
why is that your dream and chances are
you have a particular vision of what
that looks like which may not actually
be a physicist or investment banker but
once you understand what appeals to you
about the investment banker or being a
physicist
you may be able to duplicate or satisfy
those needs in an alternate profession
so a lot of people will have fantasies
of like oh i want to be this because if
i am this then i will be happy but what
they're really chasing is what they
think that thing is
so we see this a lot in terms of like
relationships too where sometimes you'll
have like a vision of a person and
you'll be like oh i really want to love
that i want to be dating that person but
you don't really know who that person is
and reality is very different from what
fantasy you create in your mind so it's
okay to have dreams i'm not saying
abandon your dreams because you tested
low on your iq by all means go for it
like if you want to study business like
study business and then apply for a job
in an investment bank by all means go
for it but i'd also like encourage you
to be curious about what does it mean to
you to be in investment banking what is
it what is the kind of how would that
fulfill you and once you understand what
that need is you may be able to fulfill
it outside of investment banking which
is how you get meaning and fulfillment
you